Futhark
==========

Futhark is a purely functional data-parallel programming language.
Its optimising compiler is able to compile it to typically very
performant GPU code.  The language and compiler is developed as part
of the [HIPERFIT](http://hiperfit.dk) project at
[DIKU](http://diku.dk).  The project is still research-quality, and
the focus has mostly been on ensuring high runtime-performance, so the
source language still lacks many niceties for manual programming - it
is fairly usable as a target for high-level code generation, however.

The [incomplete documentation is
here](http://futhark.readthedocs.org).  You can also check our our
[website](http://futhark-lang.org).

Installation
============

You are *strongly recommended* to use [Stack](http://haskellstack.org)
for building the Futhark compiler from scratch.  It avoids many of the
problems usually associated with the older Haskell build tool,
`cabal-install`.  This section describes how to use Stack.

To get all the prerequisites for building the Futhark compiler
(including, if necessary, the appropriate version of the Haskell
compiler), run:

    stack setup

*Note that this will not install anything system-wide and will have no
effect outside the Futhark build directory*.  Now you can run the
following command to build the Futhark compiler, including all
dependencies:

    stack build

The Futhark compiler and its tools will now be built.  You can install
it to your `$HOME/.local/bin` by running:

    stack install

Make sure this directory is in your `$PATH`.  Alternatively, just copy
the binaries where you need them.

Installation with `cabal-install`
---------------------------------

*Using Stack, as described in the previous section, is strongly
 recommended.*

You will need GHC 7.8 or newer and a recent version of
[Alex](https://www.haskell.org/alex/) to compile Futhark.

Just run `cabal install` and executables by the names of `futhark`,
`futhark-c`, `futhark-opencl` and `futharki` will be installed in your
Cabal bin directory, most likely $HOME/.cabal/bin.

Otherwise, just run `cabal configure`, followed by `cabal build`, and
the executable can be found in `dist/build/futhark/futhark`.

You can get a sufficiently new version of Alex by running `cabal
install alex` if `$HOME/.cabal/bin` is in your `$PATH`.  If you
accidentally try (and fail) to install Futhark with an older version
of Alex, you will need to run `cabal clean` to ensure that the broken
build artifacts will not interfere with the new build.

Make sure that you have a recent Cabal to go with your GHC.  A common
mistake is to only upgrade GHC, but use an old Cabal (i.e. older than
1.20; check with cabal --version).  If you compile some of the
dependencies with an old Cabal by mistake, and then fail later in the
process, you will have to delete your `~/.ghc` directory to remove the
broken libraries.

Usage
=====

To compile a Futhark program to sequential C:

    futhark-c prog.fut -o prog

Or maybe OpenCL:

    futhark-opencl prog.fut -o prog

And then run it:

    ./prog < prog.input

To interpret a Futhark program:

    futharki prog.fut < prog.input

Hacking
=======

We try to make use of Github issues, which are further [organised on
waffle.io](https://waffle.io/HIPERFIT/futhark).

[![Stories in Ready](https://badge.waffle.io/hiperfit/futhark.png?label=ready&title=Ready)](https://waffle.io/hiperfit/futhark)

For every commit, Futhark is automatically built and tested [on
Travis](https://travis-ci.org/HIPERFIT/futhark).

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/HIPERFIT/futhark.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/HIPERFIT/futhark)

Testing
=======

Run the `data/runtests.sh` script to check how well we're doing.  Use
`data/runtests.sh -t` if you're in a hurry and only want the test
suite to do type checking.
